---
sidebar_label: Fundamentals
sidebar_position: 0
---

# Job Specification

A **Job** represents a discrete unit of work that can be scheduled and executed. It carries all the necessary information to define the nature of the work, how it should be executed, and the resources it requires. It is represented in a `.yaml` document with a list of fields, for example:

```yaml
Name: Sample job
Type: batch
Count: 1
Priority: 50
Meta:
  version: "1.2.5"
Labels:
  project: "my-project"
Constraints:
  - Key: Architecture
    Operator: '='
    Values:
      - arm64
  - Key: region
    Operator: '='
    Values:
      - us-west-2
Tasks:
  #...
```

## Job Parameters
The following parameters are specified by the user.

- **Name** `(string: <optional>)`: A logical name to refer to the job. Defaults to job ID.
- **Namespace** `(string: "default")`: The namespace in which the job is running. `ClientID` is used as a namespace in the public demo network.
- **Type** `(string: <required>)`: The type of the job, such as `batch`, `ops`, `daemon` or `service`. You can learn more about the supported jobs types in the [Job Types](../job-types.md) guide.
- **Priority** `(int: 0)`: Determines the scheduling priority.
- **Count** `(int: <required>)`: Number of replicas to be scheduled. This is only applicable for jobs of type `batch` and `service`.
- **Meta** <code>(<a href="../job-specification/meta">Meta[]</a>: nil)</code>: Arbitrary metadata associated with the job.
- **Labels** <code>(<a href="./label">Label[]</a>: nil)</code>: Arbitrary labels associated with the job for filtering purposes.
- **Constraints** <code>(<a href="./constraint">Constraint[]</a>: nil)</code>: These are selectors which must be true for a compute node to run this job.
- **Tasks** <code>(<a href="./task">Task[]</a>: \<required>\)</code>: Task associated with the job, which defines a unit of work within the job. Today we are only supporting single task per job, but with future plans to extend this.
- **InputSource** <code>(<a href="./input-source">InputSource[]</a>: nil)</code>: Defines where and how to retreive specific artifacts needed for a Task, such as files or data.
- **Network** <code>(<a href="./network">Network[]</a>: \<optional>\)</code>: Defines the scope and constraints of the network connectivity based on the demands of the Task.
- **Resources** <code>(<a href="./resources">Resources[]</a>: \<optional>\)</code>: Provides a structured way to detail the computational resources a Task requires.
- **ResultPath** <code>(<a href="./result-path">ResultPath[]</a>: \<optional>\)</code>: Denotes a specific location within a Task, that should be retained or published after Task's execution.
- **SpecConfig** <code>(<a href="./spec-config">SpecConfig[]</a>: \<optional>\)</code>: Provides a unified structure to specify configurations for various components in Bacalhau, including engines, publishers, and input sources.
- **Timeouts** <code>(<a href="./timeouts">Timeouts[]</a>: \<optional>\)</code>: Provides a mechanism to impose timing constraints on specific task operations, particularly execution.


## Server-Generated Parameters
The following parameters are generated by the server and should not be set directly.
- **ID** `(string)`: A unique identifier assigned to this job. It's auto-generated by the server and should not be set directly. Used for distinguishing between jobs with similar names.
- **State** <code>(<a href="./state">State</a>)</code>: Represents the current state of the job.
- **Version** `(int)`: A monotonically increasing version number incremented on job specification update.
- **Revision** `(int)`: A monotonically increasing revision number incremented on each update to the job's state or specification.
- **CreateTime** `(int)`: Timestamp of job creation.
- **ModifyTime** `(int)`: Timestamp of last job modification.