# NAME

Bacalhau API

This page is the reference of the Bacalhau REST API. Project docs are available at https://docs.bacalhau.org/. Find more information about Bacalhau at https://github.com/filecoin-project/bacalhau.

# VERSION

Automatically generated by the [Swagger Codegen](https://github.com/swagger-api/swagger-codegen) project:

- API version: 1.0.0
- Package version: 
- Build package: io.swagger.codegen.v3.generators.scala.ScalaClientCodegen
For more information, please visit [https://github.com/filecoin-project/bacalhau](https://github.com/filecoin-project/bacalhau)

# Requirements

Building the API client library requires [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/) to be installed.

## Installation

To install the API client library to your local Maven repository, simply execute:

```shell
mvn install
```

To deploy it to a remote Maven repository instead, configure the settings of the repository and execute:

```shell
mvn deploy
```

Refer to the [official documentation](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-deploy-plugin/usage.html) for more information.

### Maven users

Add this dependency to your project's POM:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.swagger</groupId>
    <artifactId>swagger-scala-client</artifactId>
    <version>1.0.0</version>
    <scope>compile</scope>
</dependency>
```

### Gradle users

Add this dependency to your project's build file:

```groovy
compile "io.swagger:swagger-scala-client:1.0.0"
```

### SBT users

```scala
libraryDependencies += "io.swagger" % "swagger-scala-client" % "1.0.0"
```

## Documentation for API Endpoints

All URIs are relative to *http://bootstrap.production.bacalhau.org:1234/*

Class | Method | HTTP request | Description
------------ | ------------- | ------------- | -------------
*HealthApi* | [**apiServerDebug**](HealthApi.md#apiServerDebug) | **GET** /debug | Returns debug information on what the current node is doing.
*HealthApi* | [**apiServerHealthz**](HealthApi.md#apiServerHealthz) | **GET** /healthz | 
*HealthApi* | [**apiServerLivez**](HealthApi.md#apiServerLivez) | **GET** /livez | 
*HealthApi* | [**apiServerLogz**](HealthApi.md#apiServerLogz) | **GET** /logz | 
*HealthApi* | [**apiServerReadyz**](HealthApi.md#apiServerReadyz) | **GET** /readyz | 
*HealthApi* | [**apiServerVarz**](HealthApi.md#apiServerVarz) | **GET** /varz | 
*JobApi* | [**pkgApiServerSubmit**](JobApi.md#pkgApiServerSubmit) | **POST** /submit | Submits a new job to the network.
*JobApi* | [**pkgPublicapiEvents**](JobApi.md#pkgPublicapiEvents) | **POST** /events | Returns the events related to the job-id passed in the body payload. Useful for troubleshooting.
*JobApi* | [**pkgPublicapiList**](JobApi.md#pkgPublicapiList) | **POST** /list | Simply lists jobs.
*JobApi* | [**pkgPublicapiLocalEvents**](JobApi.md#pkgPublicapiLocalEvents) | **POST** /local_events | Returns the node&#x27;s local events related to the job-id passed in the body payload. Useful for troubleshooting.
*JobApi* | [**pkgPublicapiResults**](JobApi.md#pkgPublicapiResults) | **POST** /results | Returns the results of the job-id specified in the body payload.
*JobApi* | [**pkgPublicapiStates**](JobApi.md#pkgPublicapiStates) | **POST** /states | Returns the state of the job-id specified in the body payload.
*MiscApi* | [**apiServerId**](MiscApi.md#apiServerId) | **GET** /id | Returns the id of the host node.
*MiscApi* | [**apiServerPeers**](MiscApi.md#apiServerPeers) | **GET** /peers | Returns the peers connected to the host via the transport layer.
*MiscApi* | [**apiServerVersion**](MiscApi.md#apiServerVersion) | **POST** /version | Returns the build version running on the server.

## Documentation for Models

 - [ActiveJob](ActiveJob.md)
 - [BuildVersionInfo](BuildVersionInfo.md)
 - [Deal](Deal.md)
 - [DebugResponse](DebugResponse.md)
 - [EventsRequest](EventsRequest.md)
 - [EventsResponse](EventsResponse.md)
 - [FreeSpace](FreeSpace.md)
 - [HealthInfo](HealthInfo.md)
 - [Job](Job.md)
 - [JobCreatePayload](JobCreatePayload.md)
 - [JobEvent](JobEvent.md)
 - [JobExecutionPlan](JobExecutionPlan.md)
 - [JobLocalEvent](JobLocalEvent.md)
 - [JobNodeState](JobNodeState.md)
 - [JobShardState](JobShardState.md)
 - [JobShardingConfig](JobShardingConfig.md)
 - [JobSpecDocker](JobSpecDocker.md)
 - [JobSpecLanguage](JobSpecLanguage.md)
 - [JobSpecWasm](JobSpecWasm.md)
 - [JobState](JobState.md)
 - [ListRequest](ListRequest.md)
 - [ListResponse](ListResponse.md)
 - [LocalEventsRequest](LocalEventsRequest.md)
 - [LocalEventsResponse](LocalEventsResponse.md)
 - [MountStatus](MountStatus.md)
 - [PublishedResult](PublishedResult.md)
 - [ResourceUsageConfig](ResourceUsageConfig.md)
 - [ResourceUsageData](ResourceUsageData.md)
 - [ResultsResponse](ResultsResponse.md)
 - [RunCommandResult](RunCommandResult.md)
 - [Spec](Spec.md)
 - [StateRequest](StateRequest.md)
 - [StateResponse](StateResponse.md)
 - [StorageSpec](StorageSpec.md)
 - [SubmitRequest](SubmitRequest.md)
 - [SubmitResponse](SubmitResponse.md)
 - [VerificationResult](VerificationResult.md)
 - [VersionRequest](VersionRequest.md)
 - [VersionResponse](VersionResponse.md)

## Documentation for Authorization

All endpoints do not require authorization.
Authentication schemes defined for the API:


# BUILDING YOUR LIBRARY

See the homepage `https://github.com/swagger-api/swagger-codegen` for full details.
But briefly, clone the git repository, build the codegen codebase, set up your build
config file, then run the API build script. You will need git, Java 7 or 8 and Apache
maven 3.0.3 or better already installed.

Your library files will be built under `WWW::MyProjectName`.

          $ git clone https://github.com/swagger-api/swagger-codegen.git
          $ cd swagger-codegen
          $ mvn package
          $ java -jar modules/swagger-codegen-cli/target/swagger-codegen-cli.jar generate \
    -i [URL or file path to JSON swagger API spec] \
    -l akka-scala \
    -c /path/to/config/file.json \
    -o /path/to/output/folder

Bang, all done. Run the `autodoc` script in the `bin` directory to see the API
you just built.

## Author

team@bacalhau.org
