# Developer docs

This page contains the documentation for the Bacalhau contributors or advanced users.

Please find the general docs at: https://docs.bacalhau.org/.

## Getting Started with the PL Ecosystem

Read this first! The following link provides [tutorials and documentation](https://curriculum.pl-launchpad.io/tutorials/) to explain how all the key PL technologies work. Read this to learn more about IPFS, IPLD, libp2p and more.

https://curriculum.pl-launchpad.io/

## Sub-Pages

* [Running locally](./running_locally.md)
* [Debugging locally](./debugging_locally.md)
* [How to Release Bacalhau](./create_release.md)
* [Traceability: Open Telemetry in Bacalhau](./open_telemetry_in_bacalhau.md)

## OpenAPI

OpenAPI v2 annotations sit by the endpoints in `pkg/publicapi`; these are built using [swag](https://github.com/swaggo/swag), a Go converter for Swagger documentation.
Find more details about the Swag annotations [in their docs](https://github.com/swaggo/swag#declarative-comments-format).
The swagger specification is built automatically by the CI pipeline (see the `build_swagger` workflow) but you can trigger a local build with `make swagger-docs`.

The build parses the OpenAPI annotations as well as the markdown files in `docs/swagger/` (containing  long-form descriptions of the API endpoints), and generates the following swagger specification files:

* `docs/docs.go`
* `docs/swagger.json`
* `docs/swagger.yaml`

Note that the CI pipeline will open and automatically merge a pull request titled `[circleci] Build swagger reference - this is an automatic commit ...` containing *only* the updated spec files. 

## Python Libraries

We ship 2 python Bacalhau libraries:

* `bacalhau-apiclient` wraps *only* the API endpoint calls and request/response models. It's autogenerated from the OpenAPI specification (see paragraph above). Read more about it in its [readme](../clients/README.md).
* `bacalhau-sdk` is a **high-level** Bacalhau SDK that ships all the client-side logic (e.g. signing requests) needed to query the endpoints. Its [examples folder](python/examples) contains code snippets to create, list and inspect jobs. Under the hood, it uses the `bacalhau-apiclient` to call the API. Please use this library in your projects. Read more about it in its [readme](../python/README.md).
